My apologies.
Um I I put up on the screen just now the
sound sound attenuation uh section.
>> Yep.
I see for example to mitigate the sounds
um like 10 p.m. that that seems a little
late um from for me at least and the
sound will travel at that time to the uh
neighborhoods behind where those
amplifiers are going to be pointing
towards and if there's anything in there
in writing to mitigate that sound trap
to stop it from traveling so far. Um I
know you can pro we can hear like the
the the cars on Route 6 for example,
right? and they don't have no amplified
sound. They're just traveling. Um, now
if we're having wedding venues and all
that, it's great that we're doing stuff
over the town, but at the same time,
we'll have to um,
uh, how should I say uh, respect the
rights of the other people, the other
homeowners on the back side, right? So,
I just wanted to point that out there
and, um, and also emphasize the point
that, uh, the 8 acres limitation there
that that was referenced. Um
but by that criteria there would be a
lot of um individuals or or corporations
or farms etc that can actually apply for
this and uh and what kind of can of
worms are we opening basically.
>> Understand?
>> Okay. Thank you.
>> Yeah. Let me come up here like here such
a good bit. So, um I'm not going to read
through all of this. This is just me
keeping my thoughts. I have a bunch of
observations um in no particular order,
just things that I want to enter onto
the record so that it can be included in
your deliberations and and thoughts on
this. Uh, somebody mentioned the gazebo
events that happen over here, the uh,
town recck commission and the fact that
the town doesn't have any noise
ordinances. We have two or three of
these every year. There's amplified
music coming from them. This is right in
the middle of a residential district. I
haven't seen anything
on paper uh, uh, regulating, describing,
discussing these events. Um, and I think
that's problematic because right now
what's happening here in the context of
what happens right over there really
looks like selective enforcement. So I
think this needs to be taken into
consideration. Okay? Whatever comes up
here has to apply to what happens over
there. Also, just because it's the town
doing it versus a person, we're still
talking about amplified sound,
traveling, residences, potential
disruptions. So that's that's point
number one.
The second thing is, you know, I've been
living here 37 years. One of the reasons
I moved to Andover was because it's
clean and safe and quiet, but I've come
to understand that quiet does not mean
silent.
>> And at the same time, detectable noise
does not equal automatic nuisance. Okay?
I can go outside at 2 in the morning and
hear the trucks coming down Route 87
with their Jake brakes. Um, in the
springtime the town for hours on end is
cleaning the culverts with these
enormous vacuums and and that travel
that sound travels per miles. My
neighbors mow their lawns. There's a gun
range here in them. Okay, all of these
things are sounds that travel. But as
I've thought about this and considered
it, I've come to the conclusion that for
everything that we consider a minor
annoyance to us, somewhere progress is
being made. Something is being
accomplished. That awful sound from the
culverts being cleaned means that the
town isn't going to flood somewhere.
That truck coming down Route 87, for all
we know, could be carrying life-saving
medicine for one of the hospitals. So,
we can't live in silence. We can't think
that we're going to live in silence. And
in the case, now it may sound trivial,
okay? But we're talking about a business
that's expanding, that pays taxes, that
provides a service that people enjoy. So
again, there's this balance that has to
be considered between what's happening
and some people find it positive, some
people find it negative. I just want
want this to be out there for us for us
to think about this. Um,
and just as an aside, when uh the DP
regulations uh were mentioned, I went
quickly looked it up and I saw of course
there are exclusions for lawn equipment
doing regular hours because otherwise we
couldn't get anything done in this town.
And uh just as an interesting thing, I
saw that there is an exemption for
experimental equipment if you're trying
to determine the amount of sound that
the equipment makes experimentally. So I
think in my in my position as an exper
as an electrical engineer, I'm going to
start designing experimental amplifiers
for you to use at every venture.
Anyway, um,
another thing
I've done a lot of service to this town
over the last 10 years, most recently
with the Charter Revision Commission.
And the thing that um seemed to be the
most significant thing that we did
wasn't the the the things that we
decided upon. It was the things that we
could decide on. Um, we were tasked with
15 or 20 different things. And the first
thing that we did was whittle everything
down and decide what was important. We
we separated the wants from the needs.
And that seemed to be the most important
thing out of that entire exercise for
me. At least it's the thing that that
people have come to me and said, "Yeah,
that's the most valuable thing that you
do." And um that's something that I
think when we look at all of the minutia
that go into this to try to separate
within the context of everything that
I've talked about here, the wants from
the needs, we have here a business
that's trying to expand and trying to
provide a service that people have said
that that they want. And and as I said
in my last set of statements to this
commission, I see the commissions within
town as um trying to enhance the town
and trying to facilitate the things that
the town wants to do rather than to
serve as obstacles. Granted, you know,
we're trying to protect property values
and and all the things that go along
with it. That that is the charge of of
planning and zoning. Um, I have to say
when when Ryan, you know, he's he's my
friend, he's my neighbor. When he first
spoke to me about this last year, um,
about the few complaints and this
proposal,
my advice to him wasn't constructive.
Um, I basically said for him to ignore
the commission, only I didn't say it
quite that politely. Um and you know
because my feeling was was that
and maybe this is the the libertarian in
me that um you know we live in a country
where everything is allowed until it is
prohibited and that is one of kind of
the the bedrock foundations of the
common laws on which this country is is
founded. A lot of other countries it's
exactly the opposite. In the military,
it's exactly the opposite where things
aren't allowed until they're allowed.
Here, we don't work that way. And the
advice that I gave to him was that
uh the town and this commission only has
the jurisdiction over you that it
already has. Well, what you decide to
surrender to them. And that's what these
new regulations are. They're
self-imposed limits over what is now
currently an unregulated set of
circumstances.
Seeing the amount of effort that's gone
into this, looking at the number of
people who are affected and complain
versus the number who are speaking
positive or have spoken positively about
this. I'm I I you can't obviously can't
completely disregard they have
credibility,
but you have to ask yourself in
considering all of this, what are in the
best interests of the town? What things
serve the town the best? And after
having looked at this in detail and
looking at the amount of effort that's
been devoted to this, I think about the
kind of triage that we did in the uh the
charter revision commission and I'm
slowly circling around to the advice
that I initially gave him.
I'll just leave it at that.
Okay. Thanks, Bob.
Any other comments?
Jeff Ballard 174 Lake Road. Um I don't
know Ryan to pitch at all. Um I've been
to the last concert they had and I went
to the Andover and over collaboration
crafts fair where I believe they had
music also.
I think it's a great idea that people
are getting out of their houses that
they're going to socialize with their
neighbors. They're going to they're
going to
They're going to meet people. They're
going to get to know people. They're
going to get to talk to their neighbors,
socialize.
Um,
Hartford Jazz Society, the oldest jazz
society in America, still operating, is
running a Monday night jazz in Bushnell
Park. When it's in the city, they get
over at 11:00 and then disperse.
Uh Harford Jazz Society is also
promoting uh this weekend um Hartford
Jazz
um the festival which also gets over at
Leic. Um I I recently attended the first
Thursday of the month down between
Marboro and and East Ton on the right
hand side is a farm and I don't know the
name the farm.
>> Farmer Carter Hill.
>> Okay. far on Carter Hill and that was a
great venue. Um and it, you know, had
amplified music and I believe they got
over at 10:30 and then dispersed. Um
I've lived in town for 45 years now. Um
I live on Lake Road. I can hear the
traffic on six at night.
That's normal. I don't find that
distractive or annoying or whatever.
It's just light. Um, when I moved into
town, I was when the red bar was going
on and the right away, they used to have
bingo, they used to have bands, they
used to have movies. I believe that got
over at 10:00.
My understanding being in the lake zone
where sound travels across the the water
horrendously it's almost amplified where
it doesn't have the barriers of forests
and trees and and and and hills or
whatever.
The curfew to my understanding in the
lake district it was 10 10:00.
Now I think that is not unreasonable.
I don't think that 11:00
is unreasonable depending on whether
it's a Friday or Saturday night or
whether it's during the weekend. I think
that ought to be taken into account what
day and and what the what the venue is.
Uh
I uh
I I'm all in favor of it. Um I I think
that you know you should be looking at
what is the decimal level of root six as
being a background and if it's a 75 dB
60 certainly to me is not is not
outrageous or or or a problem. Um, I
have been working on uh for years now uh
for the hunters up at Forest Stage Farm
on Paris Swamp.
When I'm up there on Sundays and
Saturdays during the day, I can hear the
the gunfire. I can hear the traffic on
the sh.
It's
I have no problem with more business,
more people coming into town to spend
their money. We're a small community
with not a big tax base
other than the few businesses. Uh
I don't have a problem with that. I I
think it's a a very positive uh
direction for the town to be moving in.
I think uh the economic development um
of the town is is in line with this and
that is my opinion. Thank you. Okay.
>> Thank you, Jeff. Anybody else?
Yeah,
>> Lordy Mayor Valley Road. First of all, I
want to commend Brian for taking so much
time and energy into this document. For
somebody that's not on a board
commission or involved in municipal
work, you have done a really good job.
Um, I also want to just note that the
definition of a farm that you have in
your regulations is not what uh the
EA490
defines as a farm. There's no acreage
requirement for PA490. It just there's
other things. So you have three acres,
but that's not the same for PA490. You
could have an acre, quarter of an acre,
100 acres. So
I think you just need to determine what
you're considering the farm or not the
farm
by those two things. That's all I have
to say.
>> Okay. Anybody else?
>> Okay. you said you'd go back if I
thought something else just
>> and in fact I would like you to start
from the beginning on yours so we can
have it all recorded now. So to get you
ready for that I'm going to read one
that I got uh sent to me into the record
but I I would like to get your comments
in the public record and we weren't
recording and I apologize for that. Uh I
do I just do a terrible job. I would be
fired. So there you go.
But this is a this is a letter from
Marcus and Paula King on Oak Farms Road,
dear members of the planning zoning
commission. We are ready to express our
support for the pitch family and farm to
continue to hold events for the
community at their location. These
performances have become a feature of
our community, bringing people together
in a way to entertain and connect with
others in our community.
Live music and other types of shows at
the farm create a space where we can all
gather, relax, and enjoy shared
experiences. These events strengthen
community ties by giving people a reason
to come together in person and build
relationships that extend beyond the
shows themselves.
By providing a stage for local
musicians, comedians, and performers,
Pitch Family Farm helps local talent
with an opportunity to perform.
Supporting local talent keeps our
creative community alive and gives
artists a chance to reach new audiences,
practice their skills, and contribute to
the culture of our area.
Events at the farm are inclusive and
accessible, providing affordable
entertainment option for families, young
adults, and seniors alike. Rather than
traveling long distances or paying high
ticket prices for entertainment,
residents can enjoy high quality
performances right in their own
community.
Hosting events to the farm helps
maintain the vitality and preserves it
as a treasuring space for the public to
enjoy. This use of the land aligns with
community values of keeping our rural
heritage intact while allowing people to
gather and celebrate the arts in a
peaceful natural setting. I respectfully
urge the committee to continue to
support music and comedy events at the
Fitch family farm. These gatherings
enhance the quality of life, strengthen
our local culture and economy, and make
our community a more connected and
enjoyable place to live. Thank you for
your thoughtful consideration and for
your commitment to keeping our community
thriving. Sincerely, Marcus and Bolin.
>> Very well put.
Okay, so now we're coming back to you,
Catherine. I apologize but uh
>> yeah could I first go through with a new
I'm focusing on
>> on page two under standards it provides
property the property housing act or
activates must be classified as farmland
with autonomy or under public act 490
and I'll be addressing that with I'm
readressing
that and my question is that the term
adverbs and activities include both the
agricultural accessory uses and the
nonaggricultural
accessory uses and is that consistent
with one B on page one. This is now
referred to the new the new law
which provides the minimum parcel size
for site s and approval of non
agriculture related uses or events on
farm shall be 8 acres parcel business
and indust or industrial zones shall be
sufficient space for vendors the public
and parking multiple contiguous parcels
under the same archive
one parcel So, I think that language
needs some clarification.
>> I agree with you. And again, I want to
get the, you know, anybody that's
holding an event, we need to have
sufficient space for vendors,
public and parks. So, it's not just
parcels in the business or industrial
zone. So, we
>> we will clarify that that
>> I think one of my other comments was
it's not clear whether or not the we're
creating a whole new um
use or not creating you're providing
this even though there's business owner
industrial zone that hasn't been
clarified that they designate it be a
494 just the language I have
>> yeah so we'll have to decide whether or
not it needs to be a 490
>> yeah the industrial
Yes.
>> All right. Getting back to forth which
is where I started this whole um if you
could perhaps put up the
10 pages and as I said earlier the 10
pages came from the assessor's office.
They report annually to the um forestry
department with both the farmland and
the ag and the forest.
What I highlighted on the um exhibits up
there is the farmland
only.
The other
>> category the other listings in there
don't include a farm there. So they are
they would be the forest one. So that's
why they're highlighted.
and of these 37
farmland that you're going to find this
farmland if that if you go to the end of
the report please on the last page
if you can read it you can see at the
bottom it has a summary and it said
excuse me
grand total 490 acres 812 12.42
grand total count 37 and that's where I
got 37 from
the highlighted ones which are the farms
um over
the highlighted ones are simply the
farms of the 37 20 of them have
terms
going back. I covered everything under
there, but I wanted to say about 490.
>> Okay.
>> The farm has 37 acres,
sorry, 37 parcels, 20 of which have 10.4
acres in them. U the other thing I'm not
sure it was on the recording or not was
that you'll notice that some of the
parcels the total acreage which is on
the right hand side is more than the
number of farm plant acres and that is
one in some instances to part of the
land is also forest land and part of it
is just something other that doesn't
tell but not every piece of property
that would think I'm looking at
Hutcherson knows that. So it's that's
the farm might have to all be in the
farmway.
>> Does that all the main part of the farm?
>> Does that include your home as well? Can
your home be in 490?
>> That doesn't show, but that's not in
there. That's that's under that's under
>> seable.
But the piece I bought the cold bar
property is all of the forest.
So that I would qualify for my home 90
some odd acres
under
New York proposed regulation.
I wouldn't qualify for the rest of the
what I call the farm which is the
acreage I bought from the merit property
the seven acres or joints because that's
on the forks. So the piece down six
would p possibly by taking the
industrials off but it wouldn't be the
piece on six east of the extra mark.
Okay, thank you. Yeah.
>> Um
any other comments?
So
that uh
I think that's
>> my
Sure.
I apologize for um this coming out
yesterday. I think I said it. I
remember. Um,
again,
I don't know why I even have not on what
Bob said. I don't even know why this is
me writing this. I'm not a
law writer. This should have been a
lawyer writing this up. Um I I did, you
know, help and and I I was given help um
propose this, but again um this sounds
like to me I I did what I could to put
this together as best as I you know that
we could. Um again, I don't know how and
why it falls on my shoulders to do this.
Um like Bob said, you know, these are
regulations for the town to propose. So,
kind of what I wrote was hoping that
you, you know, not that it was a final
draft, I was hoping that you guys would
come and put your input in. I was, we
were just giving basics. Um, but again,
you know, this is way above my pay
grade. Um, but I, you know, I did put a
lot of time in, you know, this is my
third meeting. Um, and you know, and I
mentioned this to, uh, to Wayne that,
you know, this is my third meeting. I've
been here and there's people on board
that haven't even been here, you know,
and these are the people that are
deciding
how I feed my family
and they don't have the oxygenity to
come to a meeting that they're on the
board. So, I think you have to look at
the effort that I'm putting in as well
um that my you know family has put in to
try to uh you know accommodate this. But
you have to understand that you guys are
making a decision on what I can do
to feed my family. And you know, um I
just think and again this is way above
something, you know, I I I wasn't going
to we're not making enough money at the
farm for me to hire a lawyer to write
this up for me. Um I've had to have
lawyers involved with many other things
in this town that I'm paying for. Um,
but uh, you know, I appreciate the help
John helped and Wayne has been amazing
with this too. U, but I didn't think I
would be the end all, write all that
kind of rolled off the tongue that I
would be doing, you know, doing this.
So, I was hoping to get, you know, that
the final draft would be for you guys to
come up with and have a discussion on
and and agree. Um but as you can see
there's there was a lot of uh there are
a lot of people that happened like this
last event there was you know 60 people
there. Um ideally for me to make any
kind of profit on these would be 75 to
100. Last year I lost on every single
one of them but in business we know the
first couple years you lose money
finance those things start getting
built. Um
and uh and it would be the same thing
with the farmers market. I tried putting
the farmers market together. Just
couldn't get the uh the draw yet. I'm
not giving up on it because I think it's
something Andover really needs. Um so
hopefully next year. Uh but again,
that's a
to $100 profit on a weekend, you know.
So these aren't big money makers. It's
just really to bring more things to the
town. Um, so I again I I'm willing to
give you as much as I can to help
facilitate this, but I I you know, I
think uh like Bob said, if there were
you guys to help us put these together
and do these, the better off we're going
to be. So I apologize for getting them
late. I really did not think I was the
end all on these uh uh regulations.
>> Only the endall because you wanted
>> Well, trust me, I know. I know. We're in
the rush. We don't we're not so um and I
appreciate you letting that go without
going, you know, too haywire,
>> you know. Yeah.
And uh I'm looking for a little help on
on the way ahead at this point. one side
of me says we should continue the public
hearing till the next time
and
the town does take the lead from here on
to to take what we've heard
but I don't know how to do that without
deliberation
on it to hear what the commission wants
and
we can't deliberate till we close public
hearing so I'm kind of in a loop I could
I could write it
with John and we we talk about it and
then we deliberate on that there
and we'd be able to get feedback from
you on what you don't like because while
you're on this side I'm going to be on
this side just a little bit and the
right answer is going to be in the
middle there somewhere and that's what
we're going to get to but Uh
John, you got a hint there?
>> Yeah, I Well, I if the So, so based on
what we've heard this evening from both
the commission and the public, um I
think some a few additional changes
might be warranted. I I my sense is I
think we're we're
almost there. Um
but but you know if the commission is
interested and willing to you know share
other concerns or other things they
might want to see modified
um that would that could provide um Ryan
um as well as you know Wayne and I to
sort of help translate some of this
stuff um enough information to kind of
come up with a hoped for final version
that could be shared with the town
attorney before the next meeting. But I
think there there are a few tweaks to be
made. I think um and and you know I I
don't I I can go through some of them
that that I've sort of taken notes on
right now, but I but I think we're we're
fairly close that you can have a version
that would be largely ready for closing
of a hearing and and deliberations and
deliberations would be another time to
to make a few tweaks. You could you
could make some edits on the fly. But if
there are things that commissioners,
including yourself, Jed, um are still
leaving on the table as concerns that
have been unexpressed, I would strongly
encourage you to express them here in
full view of the public so that so that
we can come up with something
approaching a final version for next
month.
>> Okay. And uh yeah, I thought about
cutting this regulation down to to two
lines. One was going to be the sound
level at the property line and the
second was going to be the uh end time
and we can we could leave the end time
as it's listed now and deliberate that
when we get these final other tweaks
taken care of and we can put you know
some other means other than the state
limits that I don't understand you know
I think the the words that we had in
there before after I went back and and
understood that yes, if the music is
below background, I can still hear.
That's that's what son do out at sea.
They listen to real quiet noises and
then they can pull that out and but
you're going to be able to hear music,
>> but it's still below background. What
about for the
realistic
>> person, common sense? Shouldn't it be
similar to what is happening already?
like on Route 6,
>> you know what I mean? Like how could you
have my music
be forced be lower than what has
naturally happened 30 ft away or 100
feet away? So, here's one of the things
that I did take away from reading
through those state statutes and they
have all these timew weighted noise
levels. And so if the truck comes
barreling through
for a minute
every 10 minutes, you average that out
and it comes down to a low level.
Whereas if the band's plan, it's at the
higher level for a longer period of time
and that gets out there and and that's
almost impossible to for me and to
figure out to how to do it. That's why
there's got to be something that we can
look at and make sense. And it's clear
public supports what you do.
>> I don't think I agree.
>> And so,
uh,
I would be happy to
have the do one more one more round. And
I think, you know, there are a couple of
inconsistencies. We we know a couple of
things to uh do. I think Wayne, John,
and I could probably do that. And and
until we get to talking about the end
time,
>> you're henti
>> I am.
>> You know, we we uh we made a big deal
about the soccer team and the light
shining in the the one neighbor's
property, you know, the horse.
>> Yep. And uh and so I
>> That cost us a lot of money though.
>> It it did. And uh I felt really bad
about that because the guy wouldn't work
with us. on coming up with an acceptable
plan. I appreciate the fact that you're
working with us to try and come up with
an acceptable plan when we want to do
it. Just like I'd have liked to have had
the soccer club still play it here, but
we we've got to protect the adjacent
property owners, you know, rights to not
be and and so that's that's going to be
a pick pick a time, you know, different
days of the week and and make it all
work. And we could do that during
deliberation next quarter. So, I guess
what uh what I'm thinking with your your
help there, John, is because the uh the
updated draft came out sort of late,
didn't give a lot of people a chance to
look at it, I would like to keep the
public hearing open until the next
meeting. Um hopefully we can get a copy
that we can send to attorney Brand about
half, you know, within two weeks so that
he can have a chance to look at it,
provide comments back. we get together.
It doesn't have to be much. Um
and then uh
then we wrap it up. Now,
I don't think because this a regulation
change and maybe Wayne or John got some
insight here. I don't think the 65 days
to close the public hearing is uh
pertinent. you know, if somebody had an
application for, you know, uh, building
something or something like that, we've
got to do that clock. But when you get
to regulations, well, actually, special
permits, I don't think it's, uh, there
either. Uh, but to make it clean, I
would like to have your permission to
extend the uh, public hearing by another
30 days. You have the opportunity to do
65 days worth of extensions as we go
through process. Okay.
So, we'll hold the uh we'll hold the
public hearing open till the next
meeting. We'll try to get out the third
permission and uh
we'll get you to meeting number four and
I appreciate you coming.
>> I live right down the road. Your
number's not big.
>> Okay. So,
>> yeah.
>> With that detail given to Mark Brown.
>> Yeah.
So my goal is two weeks from now we can
give a copy to Mark Grants get his
comments back uh before the next goound
but I can't
>> I just to detail I left out getting back
to my original report as I had commented
on the num number of roads and how that
this impacts it's not just route six
it's
>> I think seven
13 or 14 all together seven or eight
with the fifth.
Yeah, there's a line.
>> I mean,
>> okay. So, it is there public speak
one more thing to say or
>> I just wanted to add one thing. You
mentioned the whole fight and waiting
thing with traffic. Beyond that, there
is an entire field known as psycho
acoustics. And what's at play here is
the fact that music is the recognizable
set of stimuli to our brains. Okay?
Whereas the sound of a car is more
random. And you could have, you know,
you talked about one car in 10 minutes
and average, you could have actually a
much higher level sound from a car and
it would be for most people less
problematic than music because it is
more randomized. It's not something that
Well, maybe not white noise. They make
noise, round noise or you know those are
all different spectral waves of random
random noise. But the fact is that it
tickles specific psychological parts of
our mind is what makes it what it is.
And it's what also makes looking at this
from the standpoint of just measuring
sound levels a lot more challenging. So
okay, thank you.
Okay. So, 8:17, we're going to continue
this public hearing to the next meeting.
Thank you very much for coming tonight.
We'll see you next month.
>> Thank you.
>> Um,
that's good. We're good. Good for now.
>> Can we Can I be excused for a minute?
Just can I be right back?
>> Most likely.
Mr. Heckler is
I figured we gave him
Mark.
>> Exactly.
Then there's like
>> I didn't get a chance to pull that in
line.
My letter
again.
So scan this put
safe.
Okay, it is 8:20 and I will call
the public hearing to order where we're
discussing the application of Michael
Heckler 71 road and over Connecticut for
special permit with site improvements
to operate a homebased landscape
business and construct two bay garage
attached to the existing dwelling and
existing bay garage which proposed to be
converted to a workshop Six. The
application and request is made for
sections 4.12A2
Roman 4 and section 23 of the Android
zoning regulations.
So at this point u
I'll turn it over to you Mike and you
can uh tell us uh what what we got.
>> Okay. Um so there was a lot that went on
last minute. Not sure really carried on
over, but uh essentially uh my name is
Michael Eckler. I worked for the town of
Brian as a mechanic full time for the
DPW there. Um and I have a secondary
business that I run as well for um doing
landscaping, clearing, driveways,
everything that's on my part. Um and
essentially I'm looking for storage. Can
you speak up just a little bit so we can
make sure that we're getting it on the
recording? Then
>> yeah, thank you.
>> Essentially, I'm looking for storage of
my equipment rather than having it be
outside where it could be unsightly or
we know excavation equipment and
whatnot, hydraulics, anything like that.
You don't want it leaking period, but
they always do. Like that's just you
can't keep something perfect. Just
doesn't happen. So I would like to
propose well I have proposed a expansion
of essentially
making my two bay garage that's attached
right now a now workshop with just all
my
Can you pull up the picture of what I'm
proposing for the
>> um for the existing
>> John you want to give me
control. Maybe it's better if I do it.
Oh, you've got it. Okay.
>> Okay. I I'm not sure if I'm I'm not sure
if I'm sharing the right thing. I I
>> Yep.
>> That's a floor plan. But there's um
>> there's also a um
uh what does it say? Workshop.
Should be one that says workshop.
>> That's it. Okay. Let's see. Um uh can
you see my my website screen right now?
>> Yep. Keep going down.
>> So building location.
>> No. Is it existing shop plans?
>> Yeah. So that is the third or 14 scale
um of my current garage.
I have a lot of stuff that helps me do
my job as not only a mechanic, but uh
because I have to have extra tools and
whatnot that I don't need at work, I
have to bring home. Um and what I've
acred over many years of being a
mechanic, 15 years, like engine lifts
and all this junk that you don't want
outside. Um, so essentially all this
stuff that I have that is right now in
various storage locations
um or outside uh needs to go inside
essentially. Um
that fits pretty much my entire garage.
There's going to be no way a car could
ever fit in there. Uh so that kind of
makes it a workshop in theory. you can't
fit a garage, a car in a workshop. Um,
and I would be, if the council requires
it, removing the doors, putting a man.
So, that kind of even more gets rid of
that problem. Um,
now the proposed garage is because I own
a sixheel dump truck, a CDL dump truck,
and a 16 foot landscaper trailer that I
use for my mini, 12,000lb.
Uh, I have a a wood chipper, too. Uh,
fairly large wood chipper. Things that I
would like to be able to keep in the
garage away from the elements, away from
theft, you know, not saying we get it,
but when you have $100,000 sitting
outside that someone could just go up to
and drive away with, it's Yeah, it's not
not the greatest idea. And being the
fact that we live on a dead end road
that people do, you know, come up and
turn around in my driveway because I
have the easement for school bus. Um,
people do see things that don't usually
live there. And, uh, you know, it's it's
a little intimidating to me when random
strangers that I'm not used to turn
around in the east end and go on their
way. I don't know where they came from,
what they're going to do. I was probably
>> maybe maybe so come up and you know I
don't um I do have a lot of junk and
that's probably what you've seen in my
my my driveway. Um
I do need to tidy up and that will
further help me tidy up. Uh
I know there's probably questions about
why there's so many vehicles. I do have
a lot of projects.
>> Well, I do get I did have that question.
Yeah. Yeah, if I figured anyone a little
bit scared up the road. Um, I have a lot
of projects. Um, I love to tinker. It's
one of my big big hobbies that a single
guy I'm not married. I just have a
girlfriend. Um, a single guy loves to do
is just tinker. Keeps his mind off of
work. So, I don't have any kids. So,
that's fine. That's my advice. I guess
you could say that stuff. Um,
so again, essentially it would just be
for all my
equipment and then just any of the extra
junk, not cars, you know, anything like
that I will be cleaning up and getting
rid of or, you know, occasionally I have
I have friends that come over, ask for
help, ask to stay for a couple days,
whatever. I help them think they over
that they're not mechanics of our trade.
They like things too, but they're just
not mechanics. So after course,
so that's probably why you see random
cars because there's random people.
>> So that's not part of a separate
business go
hanging out.
>> That's just friends hanging out or uh
yeah, just helping out neighbors.
Yeah. Uh
yeah.
>> Okay. Um
obviously this document
we just recently got.
>> Yeah. Then uh Yeah. So,
you know, the uh
when when it talks about home
occupations,
you know, it says the application shall
not be considered complete unless the
following additional items are in
addition to those required by section
23. Y and looks like item one letter
that we just got down.
>> Uh the applicant shall supply the
commission with architectural plans for
any proposed structure. Any waiverss
requested by the applicant shall be
submitted in writing and the application
checklist shall be filled out by the
applicant, reviewed by the zoning agent
with the applicant. And uh so where do
we stand on that stuff, Wayne? We do not
have a application checklist at this
point.
>> Yeah.
>> Okay.
>> But I've I've reviewed the checklist and
there's a lot of things that are NA.
>> Absolutely. Absolutely. But there's a
few that are.
>> Yes.
>> That's our tool.
>> I wasn't sure if I should bring that or
not because there's so many that are
>> N. So here we need is for you to get
away and Okay. and come up with that
because like one of the things that
that uh I think Wayne probably asked you
for is a site plan.
>> Mhm. And
that is in here.
The site plan's in there now.
>> Yeah. It's the It's labeled building
location. Essentially everything on that
checklist is done. I think
>> I thought I looked online this morning
to make sure there was nothing new that
came in over the weekend and I didn't
see that but I could be in there. Uh I
think that was uploaded well today's
Tuesday so I
>> would Monday. Yeah.
>> Okay. Maybe maybe it was a little I
would say yeah because today I spent
working on the agro tourism
>> thing.
>> Yeah.
>> Um
>> do we look at the site plan because
there were a couple of things that that
I wanted to discuss why it was important
to me that we we got that.
It's
>> in
Okay. Well, I'll Yeah, I'll go. I could
I could take a look at that. I I have
not seen that uh until now. I I was
concerned about
the uh
nicely done on the nutrient allocation
worksheet.
What I didn't know and maybe is on here
is so you talk about you're you're
collecting the runoff from the roof and
and you're going to put that in the
drywall. Yeah.
>> And so how did we size the drywall? How
many gallons is it going to hold, you
know, to account for that one inch run
off on 3,000 square feet of roof space
and that sort of thing?
>> Well, that was for some reason the
algorithm in that program automatically
did.
>> So I'm not sure. I have to do my
research on that.
It it it did it did calculate the amount
of of reduction you get, but it doesn't
tell you how big the drywall has to be.
>> Oh, I don't know. I just chose the one
inch.
>> One inch means that that means one inch.
So, we have a 1 in rain event. That's
one inch of rain coming off 3,000 square
ft of roof. Yeah.
>> So, you figure that out into cubic feet
of water.
>> Okay. in the dry well has to have hold
that much cubic feet of water so that it
accommodates a one inch rain event that
that's what that means.
>> Okay. And
and not intuitively obvious that that
was there but I was interested in where
the drywall was going to go and where
the detention bond was going to go
>> because um
we need to keep it separated from your
well and your
>> of course. Yeah.
And so that and that might be all on
here with the exception of the uh the
the size of the drywall and the size of
the detention pond.
>> Yeah. Which is not on there.
>> Yeah. And and then you know
>> I have a catch basin on there, but
that's that's only for the driveway.
That's for the 180.
>> So
>> uh and that's primarily for any of the
water runoff from the road because my
road dumps right into my driveway. So
any
half an inch an inch shield right by
garage it's
>> it's back. So, uh,
other than that, I mean, I figured that
would be done more so when we're in the
building
layout process when we're not in the I
get it in its own entirety, but
>> I figured once I have the finalization
on what I have to do for plans and
whatnot, then I would go for, you know,
what we need to do for the foundation
setup and whatnot for for drywalls.
But as of right now, it's been so
unclear if I'm even be able to move
forward with this.
>> I got you.
>> The resources available, I don't want to
waste.
>> Yep.
>> So, I'm with you there. And uh I uh I am
trying to sort my way through the issues
that have already come to bear and and I
think I can get through most of them.
The the issue that I am struggling with
the most is
the discussion that Mark Brans provided
about the accessory use being
I forget the word but it's uh subord
subordinate to your primary dwelling
which is why we filed for a special
permit to uh yeah we worded it the
special permit should be able to
work with the state statutes and not
against them like I was before.
>> Yeah. Well, and and so uh yes, I
understand that you know because it says
that any use requiring non-residents or
the construction of additional structure
that gets you into the special permit.
That does not in my mind
mean that it still doesn't have to be
subordinate to the primary
purpose which is the house.
>> Correct.
>> So
So that's the part that I'm struggling
with right this minute. If if your house
was 1,600 square f feet at Fpart and
your garage was 1,500 square ft for 1599
square ft it would be subordinate to the
primary purpose but it's not. It's twice
as big.
>> Yeah.
>> And and so that's what I am struggling
with just a little bit.
>> Yeah.
The other issue that I came to the
conclusion on today, I was wrestling
with we only allowed twocar garages.
>> Yes.
>> Well, in the Lake District.
>> Yeah. In the Lake District
and and so it says twocar garage as of
right.
>> Yes. Which only one car will be in it.
Truck. A piece of equipment does not
constitute as a motor vehicle,
>> right? But when it talks about being
capable of holding two motor vehicles, I
think it says that
>> but
anyhow my conclusion on that. So so
you're as of right
motor vehicles.
We don't say anything in our regulations
about what we can do with special
permits
>> in in that case. And I think
>> something that we probably need for the
lake district is with the special
permit, we can add something bigger.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Because several houses.
>> So I know how to get I I know how to get
past that. So, the the only thing that
that I continuing to struggle with a
little bit, at least myself, is the uh
accessory use being subordinate to the
primary switch of the house.
>> Yeah. And I forget Wayne and I had a
conversation about it more recently. I
can't I can't put the words together
about it. But um essentially
because it is just a storage, it's not
and it's not like a full-blown
it's it's part of the principal
structure. And since the special would
allow me to have a home occupational
uh right, so to speak, it almost allows
for like a dual zone.
And I could be using the words wrong
could be used.
>> Um,
>> but that's what I have. Attorney Mark
Rans help me out. But
>> but the uh and I know there was some
discussion about
>> there's going to be a Yeah, there going
to be a small section of the house
that's used for office
>> office.
Does that mean that this big storage
area is not part of the homebased
business? No. So all all homebased
business is office. The rest is storage
as part of the principal structure.
Yeah. Well,
I'm learning from you as we talk here.
Again, I got, you know, journey branch
to make sure that we're we're doing uh
what's right there. I would have I would
have assumed
that
I assumed different than that. could be
wrong.
>> Yeah. You know, and that's it. It's
going to happen.
>> And that's why, you know, there's
there's more questions that, you know,
what exactly services what services do I
provide? Well,
what services do you provide on site?
and and these question those answers
bigger on go through these essentially
no services from my business on site at
all except my own record keeping so
therefore it's not a business on my
property it's just a name
I understand you know and again I'm
going to ponder this for a while but it
doesn't make sense to me that you can
have a huge warehouse to store equipment
and we don't consider that part of the
homepage business
especially when it's bigger than the
house. So yeah, so I will continue to
ponder that if some if
distance um and I guess I wish I had u
you know some of the other uh fellow
sonars in the lake region that you know
have three car or or massive barns.
They're labeled as
>> compliment, but I
>> um future have future meal. Yep.
>> And then you have uh one of the other
landscaping companies that's right off
this road here. Uh he has a
>> Sears and Sun.
>> Yeah.
>> Yep. And so
>> and uh Yep. I honestly don't know what
Sears and Son's back has back there.
He's way back in the woods where I can't
see. You're right close to the road.
>> Yep. But nobody I mean I I don't think a
DPW guy has come off my road in eight
months.
>> The amount amount of people that
actually come off my road is very
>> Yeah, I got you. So
So uh at this point Wayne, do you have
any other comments uh
further discussion tonight?
>> No, I don't. Um I I think this I think
we I don't know if you're going to close
the public hearing or continue it. Um
you know the only thing I see missing is
the um checklist as far as what is
needed for an application.
Um,
and
other than that, I you know, I I did put
my memo out to the board of what I
thought the board needs to consider
as far as this application is concerned.
I don't know if you want to everybody
got it. When did you put that out?
>> I
hopefully I sent it to you. Monday.
Yeah. I did not see that. I was going to
ask if there was an update to it.
>> Um, yes.
Well, there is one for this because the
the ZBA is is separate and distinct from
the special permit application.
>> The one I the one I read was dated early
June, updated 18 June was the last
correspondence that I
>> This is actually dated the 14th
>> of June.
>> No, July. Yeah. So, it it is it is in
the it is in it is in exhibit, John.
>> There's a memo to the board to the
commission. I'm sorry.
>> Commission.
>> A memo. I'm sorry. Memo from
>> me. Checking mine, too.
>> Okay. Hang on.
>> Yes,
>> I got it. So yesterday
memo to PZC 714.
>> All right, I got you. Here it comes.
>> Is that visible?
>> Yep.
>> So uh yes. So go ahead scroll down. That
looks like uh what was in the previous,
>> right? I I did update it. I I got a a
height dimension from Mr. Heckler on
Monday that is in this not 20. It's 26
ft high.
>> So, it's not quite double square
footage. It's actually less square
footage than the house. It's,260.
>> I'm not sure where the double came in.
>> Yeah. Missed one. Uh
that came from
>> because you because you
and eliminated the second floor.
>> Oh yeah. Okay. Yep. Yeah. I remember we
ran into a problem with that last last
meeting. So I I revamped got rid of the
second floor completely because
>> Okay. That's good to that's good to
know. I didn't know that
>> just now. So that that helps a lot.
>> So it's down to,260 ft. Yeah.
>> Okay. still would have been less.
>> That's That was probably a a big
stumbling block for me that makes that
one uh and that was going to be my
recommendation. Get rid of that second
floor.
>> Yeah.
>> And we're probably uh
>> and my residence, if you pull up the
property card, it's 2900 ft. So, that
also makes a pretty big difference.
>> Okay. Does that count? Does that count
for basement?
>> Yeah. So second floor to the second
floor.
>> Okay. So um got that. Now one of the
things that Wayne I think you had in the
a earlier memo is still yet your number
two item here. It would be nice to have
a list of what the equipment is that you
have.
>> Yeah.
>> Because I've been by your house a couple
of times and I have yet to see an
excavator.
>> Yes.
>> I saw you seen it.
>> Yeah. I saw it yesterday.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah. It's down psychology. Yep. Now,
>> and that's I think the equipment that
you're both want to get into the garage.
Can you can you get it? Are you going to
drive it in the garage or you can put it
on trailer back in the garage?
>> I mean, does it matter?
>> It does with a 10 foot
garage door can go down.
>> Okay. But still,
>> as long as it fits.
>> Yeah, it's I mean, I got to fit under a
bridge. So either way it's gonna be it's
gonna be down whether I go whether I
drive it in it's gonna be
>> very good. Are you not gonna worry about
that?
>> Yeah.
>> The uh you know I saw I saw two big
trailers
>> three
trucks.
>> Yeah.
>> Your chipper
and no excavator. So if we just get if
we just get a list of what the stuff is
so we know
>> and having place with IDM that will be
helpful I have had that discussions
those discussions with Mr. Heckler. And
um as a as a point um as a zoning agent,
I would like to see the board better
nail down the
um exactly what they are approving. Um
so in the future,
you know,
for instance, I would like to know
exactly,
you know, is it a 10,000lb excavator or
a 20,000lb excavator?
>> Okay. Is it a,
>> you know, is it a six wheel dump,
sixyard six wheel dump?
>> Um, so that a year from now, two years
from now, my my successor comes along
and sees a triacle parked out there,
they can go to the special permit to
say, "No, that that's not what the board
approved."
>> Yeah. Yes. Well, and you know,
somebody's only got the right to go out,
get a new piece of equipment, and I'm
not sure how, you know, the process will
work, but
>> but this is a home occupation, and in my
mind, it's limited in scope,
>> it is.
>> And if it becomes
u right now, Mr. Hecker works for a town
of Vernon. Uh if it if this were to
become his
full-time business,
maybe at some point it may not be an
appropriate
if he grows if the business grows to the
point where it's not appropriate for
it doesn't fit the special permit is not
appropriate for for that lot in that
location.
>> Yeah.
>> And the commission can take action
>> at that point. I would I mean if I was
making that much revenue I'd probably
buy a location or offsite.
>> Well, and we had another one and it is
in the industrial zone is on Barrett
Valley. There's a a guy who uh has a
landscaping business. I think his plan
is to expand down to the tree farm to
build a a place there because he is
growing.
>> Yeah, landscapers a growing business
these days.
>> It is. It is.
Thankfully, I'm not doing a full time
expanding. Probably quicker than I
thought. Okay,
>> John, did you have any uh questions or
comments at this point?
I I don't I was looking at the the home
occupation rags and and
was you know had some said had some sort
of nuance thought about the way that the
square footage stuff is defined that it
seems to talk about use of square
footage of the residence rather than a
square footage cap in general. and if
he's, you know, all of the all of the
home occupation stuff is outside the
usable residence that perhaps some of
the square footage caps wouldn't
necessarily apply. But that's sort of an
interpretation question and and I, you
know, I would defer to how this
commission has handled those matters in
the past.
>> I know what he's speaking of. So, old
regulations used to have, you know, 70
or 80% of your total um your total
square footage square footage. But in
the past, I don't know, I looked back
several several updates and they weren't
in there. So, at some point, they got
removed. I I think that might be really
>> I'll I'll show you specifically. I don't
I and this may be a little bit off
topic. If so, we can we can we can move
on quickly, but I'm looking at the I'm
looking at the home occupation
regulations.
um home occupation uses. Can you see the
screen?
>> Yes.
>> And there's a section in here that says
not utilize more than 20% nor more than
300 square feet of the gross floor area
of the dwelling, whichever is less.
I just in thinking about it, I don't
think that necessarily applies because
he is not using the dwelling. He is
building a separate structure for the
use. So, so that cap would not
necessarily apply to this because again,
you know, he's not converting a, you
know, a bedroom to a home office or
something like that. He's not doing
anything in the dwelling, which is which
is
>> Well, no, I I I am one of the bedrooms
is an office for two or I think it'sund
and some feet.
>> Okay. All right. But but in in terms of
the proposal right now is not is not
dwelling.
>> That is the list of requirements, John.
if we were to do it as of right.
>> Okay.
>> So,
>> so he's moving on to the special the
special permit categories. Okay.
>> Yeah.
>> Number two.
>> Okay. All right. Just I just wanted to
to
>> Nope. I wrestled that was one of them. I
was able got through and figure out why
it was okay. Now,
>> that's the one I wrestled with last
night.
>> Yep. But I would I mean but I would I
would broadly,
you know, encourage the commission to
consider
overall impact, you know, on on the on
the property and then on the
neighborhood rather than uh devoting too
much time on on the specifics of the
weight of any individual piece of
equipment, which is funible. And you
know, so when a piece of equipment dies
and and you know, the the applicant
wants to replace it with something
smaller, like you don't want to have
them have him come back every time he
swaps out a piece of equipment. So I
would encourage the commission not to
dwell too much in those fine details and
instead just think about the the overall
impact of what he's proposing to do on
the neighborhood.
So, so where you know I wrestle with
that our regs there now is
by special permit in the Andover Lake
district we're allowed smaller scale
business
and then if you're in the industrial
area or the business area you can have
larger scale business and so it's not
exactly clear where you draw that line
there and and I think you know we're
kind of close to where that line might
be. Is it is it big business? No. Is it
a small business? I don't know. But but
you know
>> I'm only making like 20,000 a year. So
pretty small.
>> Depends on Yes. Patrick.
>> We already have self-limiting uh
regulations for the Lake District on how
how big the commercial vehicle could be.
And this is from if you look in the uh
in this the
don't remember what section is. I
couldn't pull it up, but there's already
a limitation on what size and how many
commercial vehicles you can have in the
Lake District because this came up a
long time ago um with somebody that had
a plumbing company and they had a
plumbing truck. Now, we put the the last
claiming last time I was on planning and
zoning. We put it in the regs for to
limit the size of the commercial vehicle
depending on how much weight it can
hold.
>> And then there's no like there's no
track or trailers allowed around the
lake, even storage. Um so that's like
going to be our max is whatever that
rule regulation already limits.
>> Okay. Um, so if it's for storage and
it's part of the homebased business, so
the way I'm seeing it is part of from
the economic side, economic development
is as long as it's not an operational
shop like doing the work on site, then
it doesn't qualify as,
>> you know, the light industrial is just
storage. Um, but that's my
interpretation.
>> Okay.
>> We'll take a look at that.
>> Y.
>> Yep. So we don't have to worry about how
many or how much it weighs or
I don't know if you find sorry
>> I think that it's a good use good idea
for storage be able to maintain your
business which is done elsewhere
>> oh I'm gonna quickly try
>> I'm definitely asking for an extension
because there's still stuff that we need
to
>> get on.
>> Uh nothing now. No.
>> I live in the Lake District. Um I know
there are some nice houses there. Um
from my understanding, Michael's a
little bit further away from the Lake
District. There are some nice houses
there, too. Looking at his plan, it
looks pretty looks like a nice addition.
Looks like an upgrade. and to clean up
the street and make it Yeah. make it
look nicer. I think I think it's a good
idea.
>> Probably benefit the street.
>> Okay.
>> You don't have to do it now.
>> Okay. So,
I guess
>> you want you want to say anything?
>> I'm all for it.
>> Okay. Good. Um, so what what we'll do is
we'll hold the public hearing open until
next meeting and uh
I think
you know with with the changes if it's
like I think you're describing we got
rid of the second floor of the the
garage that that should make uh that
last one come through pretty easy.
>> Yeah.
>> Sorry. Just one last thing. I mean, he's
on the edge of the Lake District. It's
literally almost the last house on the
>> road. I got
>> just throwing it out there for the
record.
>> And that is that is why it's a special
permit.
>> So, something to consider. That's all
I'm saying.
>> That is one of the things that we can
consider when we make that decision. So,
>> okay. I think uh so
8:55 we'll we'll continue this uh public
hearing the next meeting uh as well.
Thank you for coming tonight and uh
head on down the road.
>> Thank you very much.
>> Good.
Okay.
So 8:55 I will call the regular meeting
order.
Roll call. We have uh an cre here
and myself and Andreas we've got you
seated for Scott Versan
additions changes the agenda none public
speak
I don't think we've got anybody from the
public John he eel is probably going to
be here for discussion
So moving on to old business planet
conservation and development quality of
life chapter.
So John, you're up.
>> Okay. Thanks. Um yeah, so I'm I'm I'm
joined by Janal. Um and we've been
working on this chapter. Um, this is a
relatively,
I think, simple and straightforward and
and possibly not too controversial
chapter of the uh the proposed plan of
conservation and development. Um, we
focus and hopefully people have gotten a
chance to sort of to take a look. Um,
I'm just going to sort of go through the
structure of this uh chapter briefly. um
where we basically, you know, try to
highlight those components of Andover
that contribute to civic life and and
civic quality of life and and doing the
things that we need to do to keep those
elements strong and vital and and
responsive. So, we we talk a little bit
about the town's government and civic
engagement, including the elements
including the schools, the fire
department, the town hall, senior senior
center, library, those sort of things.
just basic uh background some
demographics and data on the schools um
and over elementary school and obviously
um RAM. Uh we include some of the the
basic um school statistics you know um
enrollment uh you know
eligibility for free and reduced meals,
absenteeism, graduation rates, that sort
of thing. um you know adding a few notes
about about you know the declining
school populations and looking at
looking at facilities. Um we also go
through uh public safety, fire
protection, police, emergency medical,
the um the the volunteer fire department
and you know some of the concerns that
that may go along with that in terms of
coverage and and supply of volunteers.
Um, we discuss recreation, including the
two the town's new community center. Um,
we talk a lot about the Hop River Trail,
the the um town recreation facilities.
Uh, and certainly uh focus on the
Andover Lake uh area and the
association.
Um, we discussed a little bit about
senior services including the the new
senior center and this and the um the
facilities that that that they are
ramping up. Um and then in the action
items, it's again largely about um sort
of continuing, maintaining and
monitoring
um and enhancing the existing level of
services. Uh so looking at um continuing
to educate residents on on and
encouraging civic engagement, making
sure we understand the current and
projected town needs in terms of space
at town hall, space at the library, um
space in schools, that would include,
you know, potentially talking about
about further regionalization,
um fire department coverage, and and
then, you know, making sure capital
improvement plans reflect the town's
needs. um as well as as well as um a
focus on senior residents and senior
services needs. Um that's a very brief
overview. Uh hopefully people have got a
chance to sort of look through, but
again it's it's nothing too particularly
controversial and and we're not charting
new direction. A lot of the survey
responses we had, you know, had a lot of
support for support for the schools,
support for the senior services and
senior center. And uh a lot of this is
is a focus on basically maintaining and
enhancing those those elements. Um so
I'll be happy to take any comments um on
that and and uh or comments that you you
may wish to share uh later via email.
>> Okay. Um Patrick, you got any comments?
>> Yeah. Um,
you know, one of the the things that
draws concern is that, you know, we're
our town is operating on a large
volunteer basis
and and some of its commission, some of
its fire department, and we got to keep
an eye on on the monitoring like you
said. Um,
but we really should be looking into
more grants if we can get them, you
know, for to help us go forward because
if we're Well, also the Economic
Development Commission is well aware of
a lot of these things. We're actively
trying to find spots for um senior
housing and smaller homes that are more
affordable and the uh business spaces
for when they outgrow their garage. So,
I mean, you know, these are all big
concerns right now because we're
but he addressed a lot of them, but I
don't know how we're going to monitor
that without
how we're going to monitor the
when our commissions start losing
members or when the fire department
doesn't show up. I don't know. I mean,
that's my main concern with this.
>> Okay. Yeah. I
My concern was we cut the down version.
>> That that concerns me too. Yeah. Like
>> wait. Do you have any comments? I have
no comment. And
>> yeah um
the part in here that talks about the
fields veterans memorial field and then
the fields behind Andover Elementary
School.
>> Yes. The recently awarded smalltown
economic assistance program grant is
putting in the playscape pickle ball
courts and so on at the veterans
memorial field not the field behind the
school.
>> You're right. You're right. Yeah. Um
yeah. Okay. Uh
>> so that needs to be changed. That sent
these
You do mention it under the veterans. It
says plans and funding were recently
approved for additional playground and
pickle ball codes.
>> Yeah. So maybe we just
>> we just we could just transpose that
over there.
>> That one about the that sentence about
the steep rail could be merged in with
the sentence up above the
field
>> because it's behind that field.
Um
the other things the schools I realize
that you might have gotten some of that
information from a state listing
somewhere but in the last 5 years AES
has grown by 25%.
In 2020 AES was down to about 179
students. Now they're up to 240.
So um I would not want to see that in
there.
I'm sorry. Let me let me let me just
verify where you are here. Um
>> um
>> is it page two where schools should be?
>> Yeah, it was somewhere in here saying
that um
>> student populations are are declining
enrollment
>> dropping.
>> Yes. Okay. So, it's on the bottom of
page three.
>> Yeah. I don't think we I don't think we
quoted the numbers, but yeah, we we we
said are expected to continue along
trend of defining enrollment. All right.
Do you you you would like us to sort of
modify the way that we're exper we're
discussing?
>> I know for a fact that elementary school
has seen over 25% growth in the last
five years.
>> Yeah. So the whole that
you don't need to to look for more
efficient use of the space,
>> right?
>> Using
it. It's just about completely full. I
mean, six years ago, they were talking
about letting the seniors use one whole
wig. It's now in use. They got the
students, they don't have that extra
space anymore.
And um
your action
item number five, consider a
conversation with the other brand towns
about regionalizing elementary schools.
I mean there's a nice to save some cost
but I really don't think that's a good
action item. For one thing the ram towns
are marble and over to he elementary
schools
they're not going to go to Marbor from
here it's a hu that's that takes almost
a half an hour to get all the way over
there. I don't think that's a wise
choice to put in there.
Well, the the the middle school and the
the high school kids travel that far,
don't they?
>> They do. But elementary kids parents, I
don't think I want their kids on the bus
that long. And I know that it ends up in
Hebrin in the middle.
But even so,
>> do you have young children?
>> Yeah.
>> You don't wouldn't want them being on
the bus as long as
>> it's about 45 minutes each way to Ram
back from Andover. That's not too bad to
get to middle school age, but for
elementary that's really tough.
>> So, so I this language is written very
softly. It was consider a conversation,
but you don't even think that's
worthwhile.
>> I
>> it might even be counterproductive.
>> Yeah. I think uh you know one of one of
the thoughts as I was reading through
this is
who from the school whether it's you
know the superintendent board of ed or
whatever you know we we got to get their
chop on that write up and you know we we
came through when we were talking about
demographics earlier and I worked with
Valerie to make sure that and and she
put on the website and you know the
enrollment numbers for each of the years
and and uh she was kind of upset
with the the way that the conversation
was going and rightly so and and I think
that's probably
it's probably an issue that uh is best
avoided
at best. But I do think that the the a
chapter on the schools, we've got to get
somebody that in and ambian Well, you're
not a board that you're husband.
That's why I know a lot what's going on.
>> So, we we've got to get this can't this
that chapter can't come as a surprise to
them,
>> right? We need to have them.
>> Okay. Well, so we we'll we can make some
edits and then obviously we'll forward
it to to uh your recommendation to
whomever on the school board or
associated with the school.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Probably just send it to the uh
>> the chair is chair
>> send it to whoever she wants to. But uh
>> that way you we can't be accused of
slipping one by. We want their input.
>> Yeah.
>> Very well.
Lean, uh, did you have any comments on
this? I can't remember if I got around
and and we were done. Yeah, I thought
that
>> um, no.
>> Okay, Andreas.
>> Yeah, I got a several comments. All
right. Okay.
>> So, first thing in page one, um,
says Andover community facilities have
been wellmaintained, but several will
need investment and additional space to
support the town into the future. It's
kind of vague.
Um, we're just kind of interested as
what kind I think Patrick's on the
development board, you know, what kind
of investment in additional space are we
talking here? Uh, and what is the the
future of the town? What
>> did that want to try to
>> govern? He's he's Yeah, he's here. I
mean, Andre says that's just the
introductory sentence to the paragraph
and then the next three paragraphs sort
of break it down.
>> Okay. So then so then the next page for
public works department
>> I didn't know that we had a dog.
>> I didn't either. So yeah, that was going
to be
>> Do we need a dog?
>> I don't think we do.
>> And and then also No, we don't have a
dog. We we do not have a dog pound.
It's not active. It's there. You can see
it. But
>> we contract with with
>> Yeah, we contract with somebody which
>> which they have a centralish central
place right there. So I mean if we need
a dog pond here to keep dogs there when
they pick them up and transfer them and
>> I don't think No, we don't do that. We
we call this
>> Yeah, we have a third party dog.
>> Got it. And also
>> just so the space exists or the town has
had one historically. Do we just want to
get rid of the reference there? What? I
>> I think I think that's the best thing to
do is is you know we shouldn't even
reference that we have a
>> okay
>> and facility.
>> That's fine.
>> Yeah. Another one is the public works
department. It says it's old and
inadequate for today's maintenance
needs. Like what are those? Are we just
this is just basic language or are we do
we want to sell it out a little bit more
or is that on here somewhere where it
says what are the things that are not up
to date to to be adequate?
>> Don't you write by that place every day?
>> I do. It's kind of ugly. I mean if you
give it a paint job it might look pretty
good but
>> I know we talked about moving it up to
the dump
>> which cost a dollar and I know Eric
>> that's in a perfect world.
>> Yeah it's in a perfect world. It would
be nice to restore the area to its
natural habitat, but other than that,
>> um
>> you got to admit it is kind of a nicer
>> Yeah,
>> it is. It is for
>> especially in pride, you know, property
>> location. Yeah, for sure. Um and then
middle school was heavily renovated and
expanded. Um again, a little bit vague.
Not sure what that means. Um the next
page when we um got into the whole
graduation rate um we're saying here
that there's a decline yet or uh budget
increases regularly to support a
declining uh school system. That doesn't
make sense. So maybe the numbers are not
right or anything like that. I know I
>> right and then also even if you keep the
same number of teachers and the same
size school you're not your taxes are
going to be going up or the cost is
going to be going up because
>> inflation number one
>> inflation you get
>> and also I understand that we opened up
the pre is it preschool to other towns
other than
>> they just build a classroom if they you
know have three classrooms full of
Andover students and the fourth
classroom they open so they can get the
rest of the Andover kids in and they
have five spaces or six spaces left.
They'll let the other town.
>> Yeah. Because from what I'm
understanding is that we spent a
significant amount of money and uh admin
support to support a out of town school
program.
>> It's only a few kids. It's a classroom.
>> Yeah. All right. But looking at the
budget perspective, I don't think
something's all refinanced.
>> And then you see also is that they get
it's self-supporting.
>> What does that mean?
>> Well, it means that the taxes that the
town pays to the school, none of that
money is paying for the preschool. Their
teachers that the parents pay for the
preschool. It's not a free program. And
they also have grants that cover some of
it so that it doesn't cost as much as it
would be except for the people from out
of town. They pay full boat,
>> right?
>> And
>> so that pay the teachers salaries, their
insurance, their
>> um
>> that you know
>> all the things expenses for those
faculty that are the teachers and that
and the um equipment. they've had to,
you know, equip a classroom for a
preschool that also did not come out of
>> food out of budget.
>> Okay.
>> Um, sure they are in the building, some
electricity maybe, right? But it's not
going to be, but it's not
>> um people or the supplies for the kids.
Um, I know the Connecticut resident
state trooper program, it doesn't make
sense to me how we I mean, when we're
talking about economic development and
affordable housing, um, that comes with
probably a little bit more crime in my,
uh, humble opinion.
Um, and right now we're paying quite a
bit of money for state trooper program.
doesn't make sense how the state doesn't
cover the vehicle and all that stuff. I
think we have to pay for all that stuff
which
>> it's it's crazy to me and I I think it's
worth looking into but maybe this is not
the full
>> Yeah. I I think that's been looked into,
you know, the seniors in the town
especially.
>> Yeah.
>> Me included like that resident. I like
having having a resident or any kind of
police present and available and troop K
will cover whatever and I talked to to
him before. That's great because we need
that. But
>> I think it's a peaceful town so far.
>> One year they dropped that budget and
they and the people of the town meeting
turned it down.
>> They would not vote for that budget
until the state trooper was put back in.
products.
>> So that's the people in the town voted
for.
>> But but it's expensive and we pay we pay
the overhead for that guy to go do his
training and all that stuff. Just
getting paid by the hour here.
>> No, it's quite a bit.
>> But that's still cheaper than having
your own municipal police department.
>> No, understood. That's still cheaper
than having a municipal
>> police department. Yeah.
>> Sure. No.
>> By far. So
>> no, that wasn't one of the options. The
option was nothing. Well, I mean,
>> so another thing is this um the path,
right? The uh the trail.
>> Uh this path is is mostly used for
recreational purposes, but can also be
served as an alternative commuting
option. Do uh do people really use that
to commute to work? I don't think so. Um
>> they do.
>> Yeah. Who how many do you have the
numbers?
I'd like to know because I don't think
in the middle of the winter or what
>> one or two people or is it
>> you don't pay for the trailer anyway.
The state maintains that. So
>> right and I mean the the phrasing here
is it can also serve.
>> I think that's indisputable. I'm not
sure what your your question is here.
I don't understand like
I know we want um
develop the the trail to attract more
people to town um and to develop the
area with motel, hotels, whatever you
guys want to do or or suggesting. I
don't think that's realistic. I don't
think it's reasonable. I think that
trail is used for recreational purposes
only. I don't think people travel to
work. If they do, I'd like to see the
data. um you have none of that. Um and
also how's that going to affect our our
traffic that's already bottleneck at
four or five o'clock when people coming
back from work. So it's just something
to think about.
>> But so your concern is that the rail
trail traffic is going to
>> Absolutely. I mean if people come and
we're going to attract more people and I
don't know how you're going to do that.
I don't think it's going to be possible
to attract more people, utilize a
section of the trail where other towns
also have access to that trail and then
people just go up and down. Uh I think
I've seen more high schoolers use it as
as a running
thing in a summer town, which is great,
you know. Um but if you want to develop
it and attract people in here to have
make it a destination thing, it's going
to require more parking. It's going to
require a little bit more engineering
with with traffic because we do have
traffic issue. we have a bottleneck
because of those lights during rush hour
come back on. So, it's an issue as well
as people blowing the red light there
constantly. Um, which is a health hazard
in my opinion. And then I think the last
thing was
um I'm all for senior living. I'm all
for um 55 and over stuff. Um, but it's
also I don't think it's realistic that
every senior will want to age out of
their home and move into a 55 and over
facility. Um, I think a lot of people
will prefer to staying at home if they
can afford it, I think. But I'm all for
housing the seniors and it's better than
affordable housing in my opinion. Um,
but
>> I'm sorry. Is that is that is that a
reference to something in the this
section of the document?
Say again, John. I
>> I'm I'm missing I'm sorry. Did Andre
have have is there a comment on
something in the do in this section of
the document
>> about senior services?
>> You're you're you're saying that
additional senior housing is needed in
to allow for people to age in town.
Well, to bring more seniors to town. Um
what does that mean? Don't seniors want
to age in their own home? Um couldn't
they just age in their own home? I mean,
you know,
>> I I'm all I'm all for developing 55 and
over and supporting them,
>> but again, you know, so
>> Oh, there
>> and I'm going to talk about this going
back to the uh the housing chapter a
little bit, but
the house that I'm in takes a heck of a
lot of maintenance. It's a 100-y old
cottage to return into our house.
>> A beautiful one. You guys did a nice
job. And it uh I'm ready to find the
smaller smaller house, smaller lot, you
know, newer stuff that doesn't need
maintenance all the time. And I would I
would love that here. And I don't think
I'm the only guy. And if we could even
get some more people moving into here,
we build it. And we're talking about,
you know, 20 to 30
units or something.
>> So So let me ask you this, Jed. You live
in the very on the lake. have a lake
house. So, you would move, let's say,
the only 55 and over we have is behind
that ugly facility building right there
in the back of the woods.
>> No, that's the kind of thing I'm working
for.
>> Exactly. So, are you looking to stay
here? Um, you know, moving into the
woods. I mean, I don't know where we put
these houses in or go somewhere else.
>> So,
and again, there's there's uh, you know,
a couple of options. We've got behind
the community center here. We could put
in a little housing development.
>> Would you live there?
>> I would.
>> Okay.
>> As close to like I got you. Okay.
>> I'd live over the, you know, behind the
transfer station out there up against
the rail trail. I think Billy
>> and then there's a couple of uh, you
know, places whether it's Lynhole
Corners or Bath Property or whatever.
you know, you know, we could we could
put in something and and
I kind of use my mom as a model. You
know, when she she got to, you know, her
mid60s, she moved in, she bought a brand
new house, you know, had it built
because, you know, it was all new stuff.
She was tired of maintaining. she got a
little bit older, you know, she lived
there 10 years and then moved into a
triplex which was, you know, together in
in very and I thought that was a a great
move for her and I think there's a lot
of people that would like that, you
know, that don't have to do the outside
maintenance anymore. don't uh and and so
yes, I would personally take advantage
of those kind of opportunities. They're
not bad and I feel bad about it and uh
>> I mean the also those 55 and over house
I don't I don't think they're
affordable. I think the the most I've
seen I've seen them for there's a lot of
money that you pay a lot of. Now we we
let's transition. You know, this is
going to be my comment on the on the
housing chapter. And you know, when I
think of what can planning and zoning do
to make a difference?
>> Mhm.
>> And uh you know, we we've got that. It's
section 4.14, which is land residential
development for older folks.
>> Yeah.
>> And it's over 55. I think 55 pretty
young.
>> I'm almost 50. So,
>> yeah. Yeah, but but the point is why
wouldn't that be I and we can have some
of them great 55 and older have a little
community that serves purpose. That's
how one of these piece of property. The
other one we ought to have it uh for
anybody can move there, you know. And
when my mom moved into the triplex, it
was a bunch of those things. any H juice
moved in and with the with the uh rules
for you know going from a 5,000galon
community septic to 7500
you know
>> I mean I mean
>> it's like 50 bedrooms we could put on
one septic tank
>> a lot of folks vote to 55 and over
because I don't want the younger kids
coming in there partying
>> that's fine yeah I'm I'm for both
>> you know but right now our regulation
>> requires over 55 okay
>> and I
That's the thing that we can do to best
suit the town. And it's not going to be
a huge change over 55, no more kids in
the school. So, you know, it's cheap to
the town, but but we, you know, whether
it's Yugan students, young professionals
starting out to work in, we we we can do
that. And that's not like putting one
triplex in the middle of all the houses
out on Hope Farm Road or something. It's
not like we're going to build 200 units
because I realistically how many people
are going to stay in Andover
>> or in Connecticut people leave
Connecticut. Well, you are an exception,
but you know,
>> I did for for reasons that
>> okay
>> are you know kind of these are you know
I mean yeah especially with this
affordable housing that's one of the
reasons why I moved to
>> I think you're confusing affordable
housing with
>> it's still based on income
>> workace still based on
>> of it is yeah
>> a lot of it all of it
>> but anyways so yeah but that that's just
just to clarify and and you know I'm all
for 55 and over and helping the agent
community who wants to stay in Andover,
you know, it's just a slippery slope,
right? You know, start developing these
things and they grow into this massive
things. Now we're bringing in all ages
and everything else. So,
>> I don't think I don't think
>> I don't think we'll get there, but it's
just something that
>> if we had 40 extra units in town, I
think that' be great
>> by the dump. Great. Yeah. Sure. Uh, I
mean, our family, we moved to Andover 20
years ago because we wanted to be able
to build a house that my in-laws could
live in with us. And the house we had in
West Hartford, it was 10 ft to the
property line. There was no room to
expand without giving up your whole
backyard.
>> No privacy.
>> So, we found a lot. We built our house
with an in-law apartment on it.
My in-laws stayed there for almost 10
years before my the last passed away.
6 months later, our daughter who had
graduated from college moved into that
apartment. She lived in the apartment
until she got married. Moved out. They u
had a few years. I had a house in East
Hampton. And now we decided, my husband
and I, that we needed to downsize. We
started looking at other houses. We
started looking at what it would cost to
build a smaller house and it was like,
"Oh my goodness." We said, "Hey, we're
going to we'd like to move into the
apartments. Do you want the house?" So,
our daughter and son-in-law have just
moved back into the house and the
apartment and it's great.
>> Yeah.
>> But it was the accessory apartment kind
of thing that's now allowed to be built
and we had built that on a house was
built. But I look I look at it from the
eye of a developer and we need to be
ready to go with a plan that supports
them enthusiastically want to do
something here
>> or otherwise you know
>> right this minute everybody in kind of
happy with the way it is. You know
there's
>> what what what are they not happy with?
>> No they are happy.
>> Yeah. I mean, my my tax is run $1,200
>> because my house got reassessed, right?
Before I bought it for pretty penny,
right?
>> We dumped the entire savings in there to
live in a town like this.
>> Yeah.
>> So, that's why I'm on this board. That's
why I'm engaged.
Our taxes went up $1,200. Our mill rate
did not go down.
>> But your property value went up also.
>> Okay.
>> That's why you got tax,
>> but still $1,200. That's a lot of money.
Um so I I doubt if if it you know if it
continue to
grow and the taxes grow I mean um tax
income but for low affordable housing
you know I mean you we'll talk about the
next chapter here and I got some
comments on that too um you know people
going to look at elsewhere out of state
to to move because I7 $8,000 a year that
used to be five five and a half a year,
two years before it's a significant
difference and f folks who are retiring
might not want to stay here
>> because they're study. So, I don't know.
So, it's just something to think about.
I get it.
>> They got two kids living in the state.
>> Yeah.
>> You what?
>> You're a lucky one.
>> Two kids living in the state. One in
Glastonbury, one in Barbara or one in
>> two high tax towns. Very high tax. I
live in both. So, um
>> I don't know that much of any town in
this state that anywhere that low taxes
nowadays. Well, as long as we got
Democrats in power and we're going to
have high exit. That's just my opinion.
>> Okay. We're going to keep politics.
>> All right. Yeah, absolutely. That's a
common and observation.
>> My only comment on on the uh quality
Well, I have two. I was surprised that
we said, you know, when we were talking
about building a new uh wing on the town
hall that had accessible restrooms. What
did we have before? inaccessible risk
groups.
>> Yeah, they didn't comply with ADA.
>> What's that?
>> They didn't comply with ADA. That's
that's what the accessible refers to.
>> Yeah, makes sense. And then you know and
again this goes into maybe the uh uh
when we we talk about
agro tourism concert venues I think
people move here because it's quiet
tranquil and peaceful.
>> Yeah.
>> And those those words I said they must
be in the last PC and no they weren't.
And uh but when you talk about quality
of life, people are here because it's
quiet, tranquil, and peaceful.
>> So
then
>> I second that.
>> That's my thought on it.
>> We just moved here because they had a
lot that we could build on.
>> Okay.
>> We looked at a lot of different towns.
>> We just didn't want to be in Manchester.
That's all.
>> Okay.
>> Good job on the place.
>> Quality. Excellent. Quality. We'll keep
it that way.
Okay. Uh, thank you. So, we'll we'll
make some of those we'll we'll make
those uh adjustments to that one and um
and share it uh back with this group as
well as with um the uh board event for
their comments.
One more one more here that just this I
think was in Sunday's
paper here that it was talking about
many packers contribute to slow selling
housing market but the median household
income for a family of four varies from
96,000 in West Virginia to 160,000 in
Connecticut. So that must be the Gold
Coast down there ramping those averages
up. But, uh, wow, that was a lot of big
number. That was certainly bigger than
our median income around here.
I just thought that was interesting.
Huge number.
Okay. Go ahead, John. Sorry.
So, um, okay. So, the the other thing is
we made some and Andreas has mentioned
that he had some some thoughts. We made
uh some minor changes to the housing
chapter um based on the input from last
month's meeting. Um
there's not there was it was pretty
minor stuff that we adjusted and I I at
this point I'm actually not not certain.
I think we just changed a little bit of
of some of the language uh of some of
the recommendations. Um, I know Jed, you
wanted to talk a little bit about 414,
but I, you know, um, if Andre or anyone
else has had additional comments on this
chapter, I'd be happy to, um, entertain
those.
>> Yeah. No, my discuss, you know, I've
already had the discussion on 414, but I
I do think that, you know, my my thought
was somebody wants to come in, um, we'll
work with them to change the, uh, the
regs and that sort of thing. And I think
we need to be a little more proactive
than that to to make the rigs so that we
can get some of those people here. And I
do like the uh bonus density for
affordable housing. Again, the the
affordable housing we're talking about
here shouldn't be bringing crime with
it. I I'm thinking we're talking about,
you know, good folks that we would be
proud to have is our neighbors. They
just can't afford a house right now. I
don't know how anybody that's young can
buy a house anymore. Gets off the
we got to help out.
>> Okay. So, that's um so yeah, unless I
and I don't want to cut off. Jed, if you
want to see if any other commissioners
have have thoughts on this chapter, we'd
be happy to adjust now.
>> Patrick, do you got anything else there?
>> Yeah, I mean I I want everybody to keep
in mind that affordable for andor. So, I
mean, you know, this is it's on a
sliding scale here. We're not talking
about affordable for like the city I
grew up in, Merida. That would be really
cheap apartments, and that's not what
we're talking about here. Just so put it
in context.
>> And we're not talking about a 100 unitit
30story apartment building that could
turn into something undesirable in this
neck of the woods. I mean, you know,
that's what I'm trying to, you know, you
got to put everything in context. We
have sewage limitations. We have
building lot size limitations. There's
all kinds of things. We're just trying
to make sure that for the kind we want
to we want to engineer our plan of
conservation to get the kind of
development we want, not the kind we
don't want. See, that's that's the thing
about planning for the future. If you're
always focused on what you don't want,
you're going to make all this stuff and
it it kind of bites you in the butt. So,
you plan for what you want to get done
in the future. Basically, my my
interpretation.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I mean I mean you guys
saying that you know residents with
varying income levels
>> right
>> and desires must be available. It's not
a must.
>> Well, there's no must.
>> We should take that must out.
>> Um and there's nothing wrong.
>> I put it in.
>> What's that?
>> We must do it.
>> It's it's a a variety of housing tabs
available at price points that can be
afforded by residents with varying
income levels and desires must be
available. There's no I don't think it
must be available.
>> Who who should it not be available to?
>> You can make it available. Just take out
must. You know, we don't have to do
there's no must.
>> Well, who said that?
>> My point was if we don't make it a must,
we'll continue to not do it. And
>> because there's nothing wrong with uh
large single family homes saturated in
Andover. There's nothing wrong with that
in my opinion and others opinion. Yeah.
Okay. We can plan on having smaller
units this and that. It's not a must.
It's not a bad thing that we have large
single unit houses in hand over.
>> No, but it's not a bad thing that we put
some affordable stuff in a couple of
>> I think it is.
>> I don't think so.
>> I think in the context of a of a plan of
conservation and development, um it's
pretty important to have a variety of
housing at different price points. um
especially as a young person who has
multiple degrees like I work very hard
and I don't think I would bring any
crime to an area but it is very
difficult to find um housing for people
who are younger and working and all
different types of demographics. So I
think in the context of this plan it
it's important to use strong verbiage
like must
>> you can say you can say desire.
Well, if we if we desire it, it'll never
happen.
>> Yeah.
>> If unless we choose to save us, you
know, because step one is and it's not
going to happen until somebody steps up
and takes charge of a housing committee
or something. You know, I want our
zoning regulations to be ready for when
that happens. The state may incentivize
us to turn it into a must at some point.
I don't know.
>> Yeah. veto. Thank God.
>> Well, we'll see how that, you know,
plays out, too.
>> I don't know how that's going to come
out yet, but
>> but
I think we we need to take charge of
making housing for the people that we
want to have here. And some of that is
those young professionals. I wouldn't
mind having some Yukon students here.
>> Um,
>> Yukon. Okay. I mean, I
I' I've looked at uh you know, I looked
at houses near Yukon and I changed my
mind because it was just those houses
that were occupied by students were
party
>> neighborhoods. I don't want to live in a
party neighborhood. I'm sorry. That's
what Lansboro turned into. Yes.
>> Unfortunately.
>> And then you talk about, you know, since
2008, very few new units have been
constructed with just two permits issued
in 2023. Newer homes tend to be more
energy efficient and better able to
withstand uh dam damage and effect to
climate change events reducing fi
financial burden on homeowners. I think
this is just fluff. Uh and so what so
you know what's what's you know you guys
say uh very few you know that's not a
figure. Do do we have a figure in mind
or some kind of data that that defines?
Yeah. Okay. There's that shows
>> this.
>> So,
>> I mean, how accurate is it?
>> So, 50 59 59% of the units, there's your
number. 59% of the units were
constructed.
>> Yeah. In in after 70. So, that it's a
comment about the aging of our current
housing stock.
>> Okay.
>> But you look at at this, you know, chart
on page two.
>> I mean, homes have to be maintained,
right? That's part of being a homeowner.
>> Yeah.
>> So, Right. But as as costs increase, pe
especially people on fixed income such
as retirees, which is increasingly a
large portion of our population, are
less and less able to handle the
increased costs of an aging uh house.
>> Yeah. Okay. Fair. Yeah.
>> I would think affordable housing is Yes.
two bedroomedroom, three bedroomedroom
houses that would be like 1,400 to,600
square feet smaller. Not these big
fourbedroom homes that we've been
building than I mean the neighborhood I
live in, it's all like 2500 square ft or
bigger. That whole neighborhood that was
built 20 years ago, um it's not an
affordable neighborhood. We need to have
more affordable stuff. Okay. To build
the small cakes, small ranches
>> that we have plenty of those, too. I
mean, on Bear Swamp, there's a handful
of, you know, less than 2,000 square
foot.
>> Well, I think we need more,
>> but it's on like a two acre lot.
>> It makes it more expensive. They have
them clustered.
>> You put some things on quarter acre
lots. As long as it's
>> There's a And over Lake District is
quarter acre lot.
>> It is. There's your and
>> they're more expensive because they're
on the lake,
>> right?
>> And they're older most of them.
>> I mean, remember is the size of the lot
is
also dictated by the topography and the
ability to locate us locate septic.
>> Like my lot's 10 acres, but
the buildable part of that lot is pretty
small.
So,
Okay.
>> Okay. Other I'm I the audio just cut
out. I don't know if everyone's done
with their comments or if there's
something else.
>> Again, Andreas, I uh you know,
appreciate the the conversation we have
because that's what fleshes out, you
know, your mind. It helps me to better
understand the issue.
>> Absolutely.
>> But Patrick Patrick said it perfectly.
like, you know, we're going to make it
affordable to hand over. I get that.
Just have to be careful because there's
a slippery slope, you know, and and so
>> I I'm not sure what the slippery slope
means, but I I appreciate the comment.
>> Yeah. No, it it is what it means.
Exactly that. You know, we open up a
door and if we're not careful, things
can this time can, you know, go down a
hill. And it's not against anybody or
anything else. You know, I was there. I
was a low-inccome person. I rented a I'm
from New London. I live in New London. I
worked hard. I have multiple degrees. I
work very hard to get to where I am. So,
I want to live in a town.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, based on peace, quiet, you
know, safe. That's just the key.
>> Yeah. Peace, love, understanding, and
all that good stuff.
>> And anyone can do that and achieve that.
So, it's just it's just got to be
careful. So,
>> okay. But I appreciate everybody's
understanding and um
>> yeah.
>> All right.
>> Okay. So, what else you got for us,
John?
>> You're muted.
>> You're on mute.
>> Sorry. Sorry. Um so, that's it for uh
those. We'll again we'll make additional
edits and I would encourage anyone if
Andreas or anyone else has some
additional proposed edits to um either
of those chapters. Please email me um in
the next week or so and we'll make those
change and and circulate those. Uh
otherwise the next chapter I'm vamping
here as I'm trying to bring up the
sections. Um will be
>> I believe it's climate change.
>> Okay. Yep. will be uh climate change and
resilience.
>> Yeah.
>> And that'll be for next month.
>> Thank you, Janelle.
>> Was climate change mandated?
>> Um
yes. Yes. the governor's bill. Uh but it
it's it the effective date is not until
after we'll finish this, but but you
know, broadly speaking, the state um is
asking, you know, uh plans of
conservation and development to consider
natural hazards. And I would say um you
know, increased storm frequency and
intensity
would be a natural hazard, you know,
linked to climate change. But, you know,
so yeah, the the new legislation isn't
effective yet, but um you know, the the
state
uh desires on this are clear.
>> Yeah, I think when we headed out, you
know, developing the chapters, we were
ahead of the curve on recognizing we
should be talking about that this little
bit. So,
yes, it wasn't mandated at the time, but
I think it's headed that way and
rightfully so.
>> Agreed. I I appreciate everyone's input.
Um, thank you.
>> Thank you, John.
>> Okay. Um,
based on uh So, I'm going to move on to
new business now. We're not going to
take any action on the pitch family
farm. Uh although uh I will probably be
looking for an opportunity to uh I think
if uh John Wayne and I were to sit down
for an hour or so next week uh
maybe we could hash out uh the agro
tourism thing and and
get that ready to go. I think we are
close on that. Uh it's uh
just takes a little work. So we'll
schedule that outside of this meeting
here.
>> Have a quick question.
>> Yep.
>> We don't have a
sound ordinance like most times at the
9:00
you have to have you know the sound has
to whatever party or something. That's
what I thought of it. I thought it was
like a general kind of thing across the
state. So,
so
>> I I would think that would be more of a
ordinance, not a zoning regulation.
>> Yeah. Well, and
I'm not sure, John, do towns need to
follow zoning regulations? I know we had
this I've had this conversation with
Eric a bunch who said, "Well, we
wouldn't need to do that, but we think
it's smart to, so we do."
So,
you mean is the is the town subject the
town as a as a corporate entity subject
to local zoning regulations?
>> Right.
>> They are unless you specifically exempt
yourself. A number of municipalities
have exempted town activity, but I I
don't know if
>> exempting the town from our regulations.
He said he can do that, but he doesn't
think it's a good idea. So, we don't
>> Yeah. Yeah. No, the town isn't because
you you guys, you know, we went through
all the light the light tower stuff and
the signage at the park. So, yeah, the
town is subject to zoning regulations,
>> right? So, that would include noise if
if we hadn't if we had a noise
regulation,
>> but talk about events and stuff. I could
have brought it up, but bring it up when
we do our deliberations. you do have to
get a permit from the town to use town
property for events.
So
I think that kind of puts
>> things that happen on town property as
far as music is concerned. I think that
kind of takes it out of zoning.
>> Yeah. But I think we're should we ought
to be I I appreciate the the thought
that we ought to be doing things the
same. Whatever whatever the regulation
we come up with,
>> the town would be smart to abide by that
too.
>> Yeah, that's deliberative. I I I should
>> Okay, for deliberations.
>> Um Wayne, I would like to uh defer the
discussion on concepts concerning zoning
regulation changes. You had one. I had
four and uh based on being quarter of
10, I don't think we should get into
that uh right now.
>> I completely agree.
>> So, I'll move on to uh any any
correspondence that you might have for
us.
>> None of any. No, the answer is no.
>> Okay. Zoning agent report.
I have nothing to report. Okay. Very
good. Can I have another wetland?
>> Sorry. Nothing on those trailers and on
bunker.
>> Nothing. I can I nothing? No, I have
nothing to report in the public forum.
Gota
>> inland wetland water course agent. I
have nothing to report as well. John,
anything from down planning perspective?
>> Um, not too much. I I I am going to be
participating with with um Eric and some
Crag folks this Thursday. Um there's
going to be a a traffic safety analysis
um that's actually done on bicycle. Um
so we're there we're we're a couple of
safety experts um are going to join us
and we're going to bike around town and
and look at problematic intersections
and and some potential traffic
solutions. Um and then I would also note
that I we talked pre previously about uh
the governor vetoing the proposed
housing legislation. Um a number of
groups including CCM, conference of
municipalities, the the planners, uh
municipal lawyers, etc. have been in
conversation with the governor's office
and and and um legislative leadership on
a proposed revised um housing bill that
that is going to be discussed in uh
special session probably sooner than
later. Um, I think they'll probably call
a special session in August rather than
in September to give local um leaders
for selectmen and boards of selectmen a
little bit of cover, frankly, because
it's it's still going to be
controversial and they want to um settle
it before local uh election season
cranks into high gear in in probably in
October. So, um I would look for a
special session probably happening in
August.
Okay, sounds good.
Anybody for public speak?
No. Approval of the minutes of 15 June
2025.
And uh
so I make a motion. Well, let's talk
about are there any amendments to
the minutes? You think they get any
amendments?
I had
two
on the roll call once seating of
alternates. I would just like to have
the statement in there that no
alternates were seated. you know, folks
face to make that clear. And then down
in paragraph five on the pre application
conference about halfway down, it talks
about natural gas substation panel farm
that should have solar in there. And uh
those
>> what's that? Say that again. So and I
assume it's me that I have to go to
it's a paragraph five where it talks
about pre-application conference feuds.
>> Yeah.
>> Well
center
built this panel farm.
>> Okay.
>> Yeah. These will be solar panel farms
going down. So his his actual proposal
was for a data center with
solar powering it. Right.
And so I make a motion to approve the
minutes as amended.
>> Second.
>> Thank you. Ann. So uh
any other discussion?
Calling for a vote. Ian
>> I.
>> Lean.
>> Badger.
>> Hi.
>> Andreas I.
>> And I vote I as well. That motion passes
500.
Next regularly scheduled meeting will be
August 19th right here. And uh we'll
start out with continuation of two
public hearings. Hopefully no more
public hearings.
>> Any last minute comments from anybody?
If you hadn't heard Eric told it last
night during the selections meeting that
the police did catch the people who
vandalized Andover Pizza and Andover
Landscaping and possibly other places.
Oh,
>> right.
>> Yeah, they broken Andover pizza had
broken into at least once with smashed
windows and
um I don't think the package store got
broken into or the dance studio, but the
um what's now the the is it a Thai?
>> Yeah, Pope
>> Tai place was and then apparently also
Andover landscaping. I hadn't heard that
until they said less. He mentioned it
last night. Wow. Okay. Well, thank you.
Any other comments?
At 950, I make a motion to adjourn.
>> Second.
>> Thank you, Leanne. All in favor say I.
>> I.
>> Any opposed?
Any abstaining? Motion passes with five
zer. Paper.